# Diet-and-recombination-in-Dmel
This repository contains the data and code for the project: 
Caloric density alters meiotic recombination rate in *Drosophila melanogaster*

Abstract:
Plasticity in meiotic recombination is a well-documented phenomenon with an unknown mechanism. Recent studies have shown variation in the magnitude and direction of plasticity with a putative connection to organismal stress. Though there have been many factors shown to contribute to recombination rate plasticity, dietary manipulations are understudied. Here we manipulated caloric density, which is known to contribute to well-known life- history trade-offs, to determine if it altered meiotic recombination rates. To investigate the role of genetic background, we selected two stocks from the Drosophila Genetic Reference Panel (DGRP) with varying susceptibility to starvation stress. We found that overall recombination rates increase as calories decrease consistent with previous dietary plasticity studies. Specifically, we found significant post hoc differences between the low-calorie (0.5x) versus the high calorie (2x) treatments in DGRP\_42 but not in DGRP\_217, confirming the predicted differences between genetic backgrounds based on starvation stress. In addition to measuring changes in crossover frequency and distribution, we also investigated various organismal reproductive and physiological traits. We found significant changes in female body mass, the number of oocytes in female ovaries, and male testis length due to both diets and genetic background. We also noted significant differences in DNA damage during oogenesis via TUNEL assay. Examination of ovarian gene expression confirmed that the strain that had plasticity in recombination (DGRP\_42) also had 20x more differentially expressed genes between dietary treatments. Despite diet typically eliciting a tradeoff whereby dietary restriction increases lifespan, here we saw evidence that DGRP_42 did not experience benefits of low-calorie treatment with evidence of stress response, which could explain the plasticity in recombination as a stress response. Overall, our study provides additional support for the negative relationship between metabolism and recombination rate, differences between genetic backgrounds, and a connection between organismal traits and plasticity in meiotic recombination.  
